# Hotel-Data-SMSS-and-Power-BI
Used SQL Server Management Studio (SMSS) to generate SQL queries to use data-based decision-making using 'real' business problems and proposals to generate insight. Designed a comprehensive business dashboard tailored to address key inquiries in the hospitality industry. This dynamic dashboard efficiently answers critical business questions.

## Data Collection
### Analysis of Hotel Booking Data
The data was provided in the form of a cleaned, Excel worksheet sourced from an openly sourced hotel booking database. The goal of this project was to build a visual story using SQL Server Management Studio (SSMS) and Power BI to build a visual dashboard to answer specific business questions. The questions included: determining if hotel revenue is growing year by year, further segregating this by hotel type, understanding if there is a trend in guests with personal cars to establish whether additional parking should be allocated, and lasty identifying trends in the data using key KPI figures and calculated fields.

The pipeline for this project began with establishing the software on my device, downloading this to the specifications of the program. SSMS was used as the SQL querying program to further broaden my skillset. This did not come without issues as the installation of the program was littered with troubleshooting specific error codes and establishing issues with the installation. Much of the issues were due to the SQL server being freshly installed on my device, calling for me to personalise the install and connection settings with the virtual SQL server using the newer SQL Server 2022 framework which operates slightly differently than the video I was using to guide this project.

Furthermore, once SSMS was installed the database was created and the relevant data was imported from the hotel booking Excel worksheet. 

## EDA on the Hotel Booking dataset
When imported into the database, initial queries focused on displaying all the data in each of the imported tables to have a better understanding of the fields that could be used for further data analysis. For this initial step, UNION was used to unify 2018, 2019, and 2020 data into a singular table containing all the booking data. A CTE was generated for this merged dataset and called ... This would function similarly to a subquery and allow the table to be called using a more convienent table name.

### Joining tables (LEFT JOINS)
Now the data has been established in the database and unifying the tables has occurred. Common keys can be determined by viewing each of the Excel files to determine those columns which share a name/key and joined onto the master table. DETAILS ABOUT THE KEYS.

### Creating additional columns to answer business questions
Now the relationships have been defined between each of the tables, conclusions can be made regarding the dataset by calculating fields. The first field calculated was total revenue which was generated by adding together the number of stays on weekends, and stays on weekdays to ge the total for each order, then multiplying this by the average daily rate (ADR). Upon further analysis of the fields, there was a discount table which we had joined previously with details as to specific discounts for specific customers depending on the type of order. This was joined and assigned to the correct fields, then multiplied by the total revenue to give us the total net revenue. For this example, the meals and meal cost were not included although this will be explored later as another field to calculate in order to reflect the actual net income of each hotel.

This information can be useful as is although, by GROUP BY year, each of the fields can be summed and reflect a total for each year. This can be used in the visualisation tools as well as general observation of the data to see particular trends, such as does the revenue increase year by year.

## Power BI Visualisation
When the queries were generated, and the dashboard of information was available. This SSMS query can be connected to Power BI using the onboard tools, using the advanced import to allow for specific SQL queries to be run when the data was imported. The data was imported and the visualisaion began. This began with laying out KPI's in cards on the screen, then a graph to show the revenue overtime depending on hotel type, additionally showing the market share of city hotels over other types of hotels, followed by a matrix table with more specific data for more enhanced analysis.

Sparks and trendlines were included for each of teh cards to display the trend of the data in question as to whether this was increasing or decreasing using historical data.

When visualising this data, outliers were detected in the dates table, ranging back to 2014. As a result, since the data was onyly requested for 2018 onwards. This data was excluded using a page wide filter to only include those data points past the 1/1/2018.

Furthermore, slicers were implemented to allow for customisable reflections on the data over set periods. Additonally, slicer buttons were included for the hotel type and city

All of this work was done in a rough sheet to ensure the data was reflective and sound before actual visuals were explored. When making the visuals for the dashboard, I found an icon online and tried to replicate the icons branding in the design of the dashboard. 

## Conclusions
Now the dashboard has been made, it can be used to generate functional insight into the hotel booking database to enable data-driven decision making to answer business questions. For example, it can be seen that revenue does not increase year by year, but spiked in 2019 which could generate further analysis as to what the reason for the increase in hotel bookings.

Secondly, using data in the table, the number of guests with personal cars in city hotels was small when compared to other hotel types. Indicating that due to teh small population of guests with personal cars, it would not justify building additional space as the capacity is still within range.

Lastly, this data can be investigated further using the dashboard to find specific countries that performed well vs. those that did not, and determine teh actionable charactersitics in the dataset which would lead to an increase in profits.

## Skills gained/reinforced
In conclusion, this project was very instructive as to the use of a new SQL server manager which I actually prefer over MySQL due to slightly better accessability and features. Furthermore, my power BI skills have increased, learning new processes such as transforming data within powerBI to include calculated fields. Filtering was also learnt in this process as a blanket statement across the entire document whcih can be useful in continuous data series which include the date. 

I have become more familar with graphical charts and tables, knowing which one to use depending on the data that needs to be presented.
